In the poet Lawrence David's epic "Seinfeld," one of the great heroes of the piece, Kramer, enters a dining establishment specializing in soup and requests a bowl of soup. The owner, known for his strict demeanor, refuses, stating "no soup for you." Kramer leaves without obtaining soup.


Do you think Seinfeld would have gotten anywhere if it were written like that? Course not, I just stripped all the life out of it, everything that made it worthwhile. But we do it with mythology all the time, we take out everything that made people ever want to hear the story in the first place, and we pride ourselves on knowing which props were different in the cut from camera A to camera B, and God forbid anyone say the props from camera B are canon, A is the only one that matters, B is derivative trash. We argue about who REALLY wrote the scene, and whether it was inserted later. I won't lie, I fall into the same trap myself from time to time, but this is just not the way myths were meant to be seen. You know why there's continuity errors? Because like Larry David, Homer and Shakespeare and Virgil were just trying to tell a damn story, they didn't expect you to be here centuries later picking apart the set dressing for hidden meaning.


Would you think it was impressive if someone could list every X-Files monster in order of appearance, had strong opinions about whether Scully's cross necklace changed size, and insisted only episodes written by Chris Carter count? Course not, that's not scholarship, that's trivia night. So why do you think I'd be impressed you can do the same thing with Taoist myths? That's some real "forest for the trees" stuff there, if someone watched House of the Dragon and those kinds of details were their takeaway, you'd think they must have OCD on an epic scale. Modern study of ancient mythology is like reconstructing the apartment from Big Bang Theory down to the tiniest detail, then some guy comes out and reads you a summary of a scene in monotone, and everybody slaps each other on the back, "congratulations on being geniuses, guys, we did it!" To be totally fair, though, I don't think that would be any less funny than the average Big Bang Theory scene.


"But it's a window into the lives of the people of the time," the pedants wail, desperate to justify themselves. Sure, in the same way we can learn about the 90s through The Sopranos and the early 2000s from Breaking Bad, which is to say kind of, barely. But it also ignores a lot of facts, like how Tony Soprano would have been tried, convicted, and sentenced in season 1 for all the crimes he committed without bothering to put on some damn gloves or a mask. His fingerprints were all over multiple crime scenes, his face was clearly seen all the time, do you think this story really gives you insight into the world of the time? Same way with mythology. It's a story, not a documentary, and if you think the writers of centuries ago had a stricter dedication to realism than writers today, then you probably don't understand mythology as well as you think.


Don't get me wrong, I don't hate mythology, I love it, and there really are things to learn about history, storytelling, and cultural attitudes, but too often it gets bogged down in pseudointellectualism and pedantry. Arguing about the mythological canon is equal, intellectually, to arguing about whether Han or Greedo shot first, one of those arguments just has better PR. This isn't a call to leave mythology behind, it's a call to stop focusing on the wrong things as a signal to other people that you're really, really smart, because to people who really know mythology, you're signalling the opposite. If the original authors watched Clash of the Titans or American Gods, they'd applaud harder than anyone, because that's what the story is supposed to be, entertainment. The fact that you know the minute details of the exact version of the story that one single author wrote down doesn't mean you know the "right version," it means you know what Homer thought his audience would like. And while that tells you something about both Homer and Greece at that time, I ask you, does that elevate it to the level of holy scripture, and make those who change it heretics?


Look, I love mythology as much as anyone. At the time of this writing, I'm in the middle of a deep dive of the Torah, picking it apart to try to piece together the real history of the Israelites and lost Levantine mythology, so before you come at me in a nerd duel, just know I'm armed. I'm just saying get some perspective on the thing. If you think Iliad is better, objectively, than Deadwood, or Romeo and Juliet is better than Game of Thrones, you've missed the point of it. And if you think stripping a story down to its bare, lifeless facts makes it better, Shakespeare is spinning like a drill bit in his grave right now.