If you don't know who Prometheus is, well, I don't believe you, but okay. Let me tell you the story of the Greek god who by all rights should be the major deity of modern times, because he exemplifies the high points of Western morality, perfectly balancing individualism with societal obligation. But before I tell you about Prometheus, I need to tell you about the Titans, the Greek gods before the Greek gods.

The Titans were led by Cronus, who was the son of Ouranos, the primordial deity of the sky. Cronus overthrew his father and was the big man in charge for a while, and when Ouranos told him he'd one day be overthrown by his son just as he'd done to his father, he decided he wasn't having that and ate his children as they were born. Rhea, his sister and wife, was perhaps understandably upset by this, and when she had a sixth child, she gave Cronus a rock to eat instead. I always wondered whether Cronos had questions afterward regarding the texture and taste of this most recent child, but the myth doesn't mention it, so I'm left with no answers. This sixth child was Zeus, who, sure enough, led a rebellion against Cronus and overthrew him, then locked him up in Tartarus. You have to wonder, would Zeus have even felt the need to do that if Cronus hadn't been an infanticidal, cannibalistic douchebag? Seems like Cronos should have looked inward for the source of his problems, and I'm not talking about the five gods in his belly.

But the thing about this story is Prometheus was a part of Zeus's rebellion. He was one of the Titans, and then joined Zeus's bunch, the Olympians, and overthrew Cronus. This will be important later. For now, just know that, by some accounts, Prometheus came down to Earth after the war and made humans out of clay. You know how it is, you have a stressful day, you need to unwind, so you create a sentient race. Everybody needs a hobby.

By other accounts, all the animals, including humans, just kind of existed, and Prometheus and his brother, Epimetheus, were given the job of handing out different qualities to them. Epimetheus handed out hearing, sight, smell, fur, strength, was very open-handed, and when he came to the last animal on the list, humans, his bag of tricks was empty. Prometheus said no problem, let's give them intelligence and call it a day, and that was that. No matter how you slice it, Prometheus was the reason humans are different from other animals. And he didn't stop helping us there.

Zeus decided if there were going to be intelligent animals, he needed to get something out of it. It's not really detailed why he felt entitled to a slice of our cake, but he sure did, and demanded sacrifices. Prometheus had our backs again, though. He stuffed all the good parts of a bull into the stomach, made it look like a pile of guts, then took all the bones and covered them in fat. Then he went and got Zeus, and he told him he'd made two piles of animal parts, and all Zeus had to do was decide which pile he wanted to be his forever, out of every sacrifice. Zeus chose the pile of bones and fat, and Prometheus found some urgent business a long way off pretty quick, before Zeus figured out he'd been tricked. This was the beginning of Prometheus's quick slide down the crapper.

See, Zeus didn't like that Prometheus had just made him look like an idiot. He decided he'd do something petty and spiteful, because I guess he thought he came out of that not looking quite bad enough, so he took away humanity's ability to make fire. It's not stated exactly how that worked, just that it happened. Well, Prometheus came to the rescue again, of course, he brought us fire back from Mount Olympus, and in some tellings he brought agriculture, science, math, medicine, just about everything we ever needed, really. It was a very nice gesture, all in all, so it kind of sucked that Zeus decided the appropriate reaction was to chain Prometheus up in the Caucasus Mountains and have an eagle come by to rip his liver out every day. Whatever you do, do not piss off Zeus. God of Justice my ass, he was a real prick.

Now, Heracles eventually came and cut him loose, and then Prometheus told Zeus there was a prophecy about one of Zeus's sons overthrowing him, which is really a weird family tradition. The ancient Greeks really had a thing about sons overthrowing fathers, that and incest, they just couldn't get enough. Zeus figured, between the centuries of torture and the heads-up about the impending patricide, they were square, and didn't do anything else to him. Prometheus, for his part, didn't create any more sentient species or trick Zeus into eating offal again, so it was all fine. Don't you just love happy endings?

1: Rebel When You're Right - 3-3 Prometheus rebelled against both Cronus and Zeus, he's quite possibly the only figure in the mythology of any culture who ever rebelled against two distinct divine regimes, he's the poster child for individuality and free thinking. But it's important to note he wasn't just a rebel because he had too big an ego to fall in line, or because he wanted to be cool and edgy. He saved his bucking the system for important stuff, like when the King started eating babies, or when the other King started arbitrarily punishing lesser creatures to show everybody what a big badass he was. It was his willingness to rebel against corrupt authority that defined him, but he had no problem with Zeus's authority when Cronus needed to be taken down.

2: No Dragons - 3/3
While it's not in the story, I can't see Prometheus creating or allowing barriers that don't have a good basis in fact.

3: Think it Through - 1/3
Lots of people want to change the world, but the world likes itself very much just the way it is, thank you, and if you go stepping on toes, eventually the owner of the toes will make you wish you hadn't. You need a plan, you can't just charge in. That's where Prometheus failed. His heart was in the right place, but his head wasn't, and soon after that, his liver wasn't, every day, for centuries. Don't let it happen to you.

4: The Mesopotamian Method 3/3
Prometheus had every chance to just hang out on Mount Olympus and try to hook up with Aphrodite like all his friends, but instead he helped humans. And later on, even Zeus was glad he did, because it turned out Gaia, the Earth, created the Giants, a race that the gods couldn't kill, and they needed humans to do it for them in the Gigantomachy. Can you imagine the side-eyeing Zeus would catch from the other Olympians if that had come up after he kept humans from having fire for centuries? Hermes would be sitting over there like "oh, hey, no problem, gods can't kill Giants, but humans can! I'll just run down and ask one, "they love us, they really enjoy those cold nights without fire after SOMEONE TOOK IT FROM THEM." Then Zeus would make him Prometheus's cellmate, but all the other gods would still be thinking the same thing.

But seriously, this is exactly why you need to elevate others. You can't do everything, and maybe there's no big problem right now, but one day there will be, and also, what are you talking about? There's millions of problems right now, do you live under a rock? And it's perfectly fine to be strong and smart and capable, but 90% of everything is being in the right place at the right time, and the other 10% is having the right help, so solving problems comes down to making sure there are as many strong, smart, capable people as possible. Mathematically speaking, the greater number of people are capable of solving a problem, the greater the chance that one of them will be in the right position to do it. By elevating as many people as you possibly can, you raise the odds of problems being solved, even if you don't solve them yourself. If you think it's not worth anything if you don't get the spotlight, do me a favor and hit yourself in the face with something really heavy.

Total: 10/12
Prometheus is perfect in intent, just short on long-term planning. Honestly, if you're going to be like anybody, be like Prometheus.