In a book on rebellious deities, leaving out the most famous one would just be weird. Would it surprise you at all to know Satan isn't evil? At least, not originally, not in the Bible, but we'll go into the Quran and classical literature after we've got that cleared up. Biblically, Satan may even be a nice guy. We don't know, because he's Heaven's District Attorney, and we only ever see him doing his job. In the original texts, Satan is almost definitely an Angel, and just as good and loyal as Gabriel, Michael, or any of the others, but God's put him in a role that invites hate. Let's explore the big steaming pile of crap that got dumped on this poor guy.

His main moment in the spotlight is in Job, where he keeps telling God "sure, Job is great, because you haven't screwed with him enough yet," and God lets Satan screw with Job. Now, either God is a real prick, or Satan is doing his job and God is allowing it. Actually, scratch that, God is a prick in this story either way, if you kill someone's whole family of course he'll be in a bad mood. But if Satan is fulfilling his role, at least this makes some sense, that God's enemy didn't just walk up and say "bro, I double dog dare you to completely destroy that dude's life," and God just does it. Satan's job, assigned by God, is to find a weakness and see if the person really is loyal and faithful. See it again in Zechariah 3:1-2, Satan is prosecuting Joshua, and God isn't having it. In Matthew 4:3-8, he comes to Jesus and tempts him to sin, just business as usual.

But the real clinch on this idea is I Chronicles 21:1, where Satan caused David to do a census, but oh, wait, that was actually God, in II Samuel 24:1. Either the Bible is having a little trouble figuring out the difference between the Lord of all Evil and the Benevolent Creator of the Universe, or Satan was acting on God's orders, doing his job. This makes sense of the Book of Exodus too, where God keeps hardening Pharaoh's heart when Moses would come tell him what God wanted. Either God was playing an extremely sadistic game of "why you hitting yourself" with Pharaoh, or this was Satan doing what he's supposed to do. Either way, seems a little unfair, God had no reason to be testing Pharaoh's faith, I'm sure Pharaoh worshipped Ra, but Satan acting on God's orders at least keeps it from being complete nonsense, and this reading of it is fully justified by the confusion in Chronicles versus Samuel. The only way none of it makes sense at all is if you see Satan as God's enemy.

And then that's it till Revelation, which we'll talk about later. Up to this point, Satan isn't King of Hell, or a rebel angel, or any of it. Ezekiel 28:11-19, Isaiah 14:12-15, and Luke 10:18 all have traditional interpretations of being a reference to Satan, but I'll tell you what, you go read them, not just those verses, but the entire page they're on, and then you try telling me they're about Satan. They're very much about other things. Satan as a secondary, veiled topic, well, it could be, maybe, but you don't want to play "this verse is clearly about x, but it's also secretly about y" with me, I'll turn your whole religion upside down. Outside of that, there are some scattered references that connect Satan to sin, and Paul in particular will not stop ragging on the poor guy, but we don't get any more insights into his nature or real, concrete actions.

Then there's Revelation. Look, I could write you a whole book about each chapter of Revelation, and you could write a whole book telling all the reasons I'm wrong, and then a third person could come write another book saying how stupid we both are and how obvious the real answer is, and none of us would have solid ground to stand on because we're all trying to analyze what amounts to John having a divinely inspired acid trip. It's never totally clear whether John is describing the past, present, or future, and even if you somehow nailed that down he's still talking in metaphors, and we could discuss them all day and never get anywhere. Remember when highly educated scholars, smarter and better informed than me and you put together, knew exactly what it would look like when the Messiah came, then some carpenter's son came walking up like "okay, guys, I'm here, let's go," and the scholars were all like "uh, haha, no?" Well, interpreting fever dreams sent by God ends like that every single time, so I'll tell you what I THINK it means, but if you think differently, you're perfectly entitled to.

Revelation 12 shows a woman wearing a crown with 12 stars. She's having a baby, and a big dragon, identified as Satan, is sitting there, waiting for the baby to come out so he can eat it, because this baby will rule the Earth with a rod of iron. Well, the baby is born, Angels rescue it, Satan chases them to Heaven but gets booted out along with his Angels, verse 8 saying "there was no longer any place for them in Heaven," which definitely implies they were all allowed there up to that point. So, to me, the woman is all 12 tribes of Judah, shown by the crown, the baby is Jesus, Satan gets fired from his role as divine DA once Jesus comes along, and Satan is understandably upset. If you'd had the same job for thousands of years, you would be too. Then Satan goes off and gives his power to a talking lion with ten horns, seven heads, and bear's feet, and we don't really hear from him anymore, till a spirit like a frog comes from his mouth later, and then he gets locked up for 1,000 years. I told you, you never know what's happening in Revelation.

Pretty much what happened there was Jesus was born, and the new order of the day was mercy, so Satan got kicked out. He started raising a fuss, and God locked him up. Or maybe it wasn't that at all, but you know what it wasn't? Satan rebelling against God before Genesis, because if it was, who the hell are the woman and the baby? Making this work as a primordial event means twisting it and confusing the whole path even more than it already was, making me wonder why God would even tell John anything at all, if he's going to be that unclear about the whole thing. Revelation already borders on completely useless, don't make it worse to fit a theory that's not seen anywhere else in the whole Bible.

Satan is Heaven's Quality Assurance guy, and if you ask me, he got fired 2,000 years ago. Now, given the timelines here, that also means he got out on parole 1,000 years ago, and if you want to say he went back to his old job, trying to prove God still needs him, well, that seems likely enough, given how upset he was about getting fired. He might even have more leeway now than he did before, without management looking over his shoulder, making him fill out reports. Satan can still be exactly who you thought, but the backstory the Church sold us on him was pure bull. Same as any regime, an enemy galvanizes the base, gives us something to unite against, and since God's whole deal is omnipotence, a worthwhile enemy has always been hard to find. The Church had to work with what little they had, and they invented Lucifer out of a divine prosecutor and a handful of verses that had nothing to do with him, because it was either that or bring back Ba'al.

Turning to the Quran, the djinn Iblis is playing the part of Lucifer, in Surah Al-A'Raf 7:11-18 and Surah Sad 38:71-85, which both tell about how Iblis refused to bow to Allah's most recent creation, Man, bringing up all kinds of perfectly valid points about his superiority, but Allah wasn't having it and kicked him out. His position there was always kind of tenuous, a djinn basically being a demon, and far as Allah was concerned, this was the last straw. Other than that, the Quran connects him to sin and establishes him as Allah's enemy a lot more satisfactorily than the Bible does. Turning to classical literature, in Dante's Divine Comedy, Lucifer is barely mentioned, he's frozen in the lowest level of Hell, chewing on traitors. In Goethe's Faust and Marlowe's Doctor Faustus, he's a holder of knowledge, and he'll be glad to let you have it if you just give him your soul.

But it's not until Milton's Paradise Lost where we really see Lucifer as we know him taking shape, a charismatic rebel, with all kinds of great lines about ruling in Hell rather than serving in Heaven, and the mind being its own place, and really just chock full of the kind of stuff that makes teenage rebels all tingly. Let me tell you, every single thing you think you know about Lucifer, Archangels, war in Heaven, anything, comes from this poem. Paradise Lost had a more profound effect on modern Christianity than the Bible did, and if you've read them both, you know it's true. Not that that's a bad thing, it's actually a really great read, but a poem from 1667 just doesn't carry the same theological weight as the Hebrew texts that predate most of the world's written records, does it? But technically there's nothing stopping it from being true, maybe Milton had a prophetic vision, which would really just make the Church of Satan an even bigger stain than it already is.

See, Lucifer was all set up to be a bringer of knowledge and a rival to God. Given Satan's unclear position in the Bible and all the Biblical events that most definitely did not happen, from a scholarly, historical perspective, like the Flood, the conquest of Canaan, just really any number of things, it would have been laughably easy to paint the Bible as a book of lies, exaggerations, and omissions, a divine smear campaign against God's rival, who'd rather see humanity progress than be ignorant animals living in a garden. Lucifer could have been Prometheus all over again in a religion that promotes progress, the responsibility of higher beings to help the lower, and rejection of tyranny. Instead, the Church of Satan is a Halloween mask for Atheists who find there's not quite enough shock value in saying they don't believe in God. It's a bunch of teenage rebels making Internet memes, and a waste of the religion that could have easily swept the Western world.

Not that it's entirely Anton LaVey's fault. All he really did was come along in 1966 and establish a standard for Atheists to rally around, promoting hedonism along with ethics that weren't tied to worship of a deity or fear of punishment after death. It was really the absolute twats who came after him that ruined it, doing things like co-opting the Cross of Saint Peter, which I guarantee you they did not know was and still is a thing, they just thought it would piss off Christians if they flipped the cross upside down. Or do you really think these guys deeply resonated with themes of humility and devotion to Christ? No, I didn't think so. It's really a prime example of what the Church of Satan is all about, shock value, contrarianism, and ignorant kids trying to get a reaction.

And it is just such an epic waste. Lucifer had the recognition value. He had the backstory, mostly, just needed some easy, minor tweaks. The Church of Satan could have been a religion of helping the less fortunate, striving for progress, and challenging authority when it's out of line, but instead it's just another form of teenagers writing dirty words inside bathroom stalls. It could have stood for something, if it had been run by serious people from the jump, and instead it stands for nothing. And it's really too late to take it back, it's firmly entrenched. So if any of you go off and start a Church of Prometheus, how about you take a good, long, hard look at Anton LaVey, and do your very best not to do one single thing he did?

1: Rebel When You're Right - 3/3
I'll be rating the Lucifer of popular perception here, since we've already explored why the Biblical Satan really isn't what we're looking for. And look, no matter how offensive you find it, God had no right to keep humans as ignorant animals. Lucifer did us a solid here. Can't speak on his rebellion in Heaven, we don't get a clear view of whether he was actually being oppressed or not, but the Heaven scenes of Paradise Lost were the worst parts of the poem, so can't really blame the poor guy.

2: No Dragons - 1/3
Just like Prometheus, this is inference, not actual myth, but come on. This guy would 100% throw up a false roadblock if he felt the need, no hesitation.

3: Think it Through - 3/3
His battle in Paradise Lost was actually a fine plan, God just beat it by being God. Course, since this was God's first fight ever, Lucifer couldn't be expected to know that would happen.

4: The Mesopotamian Method - 2/3
Lucifer isn't helping us because he cares about collaboration, he just wants to piss God off. But he does effectively collaborate with other Angels, so he sees the value of alliance, he just doesn't think we've got anything to offer. Gatekeeping loses you a point, big guy, everybody has something to contribute.

Total: 9/12
Stripped down to basics, Lucifer is really just Prometheus, but a little bit more of a prick.