I want to start this off by telling a story. There was one stretch of time where my dad thought my sister and I weren't grateful enough for things. Now, we could talk all day about the merits and fallacies of that outlook, how much of the problem was in us versus in him, but we'll skip that for now, and just say he wasn't entirely off base. He decided he'd teach us a lesson and stop cooking meals, stop buying things at the grocery store, let us live off what was in the cupboards till we cracked, and his brilliant masterstroke here was he wouldn't tell us it was happening. He'd let us realize all on our own how much he was doing for us, and we'd come to him apologetically, contrition in our hearts.


Apparently this went on for a couple weeks, and I say "apparently" because I never once noticed. Neither did my sister, to the best of my knowledge, we were just fine living like that. He finally had to crack, he told us what he'd been doing so that it could be over with and he could go to the grocery store and start making real meals again. I don't know what response he was looking for in that moment, but it definitely wasn't for me to find the situation funny, which I did. And I told you all that to tell you this: if the target of a punishment doesn't notice, it might as well not have happened.


That's the problem with reincarnation, isn't it? A worm's life isn't punishment to a worm. He's not sitting in his hole moping about having no hands, wishing he didn't live in wet dirt, he likes it, he's having a great time. Every day is a new adventure, new and exciting dirt to eat, hell, that worm is probably happier than any of us, because he has no frame of reference. His life only sucks in contrast to ours, but he doesn't know about ours. If he used to be a person, but sucked so bad at it he got downgraded to worm, who cares? He doesn't remember all that, can't possibly imagine it, and he's not upset about it one bit.


It's not just worms, either. I bet dogs sit around telling each other "be a good boy, don't chew up any shoes, or in your next life you'll spend half your life at work just so you can be allowed to live, and you'll have a midlife crisis and question the meaning of existence and die without ever feeling fulfilled." If I was a dog and somebody told me that, it'd scare the hell out of me, I'd never even look sideways at another shoe. Where's the internal logic of this idea of reincarnation? Humanity is seen as being near the pinnacle, but if that's the case, I need to go rack up some negative Karma so I can make sure I get something better in my next life.


Humans like to believe in justice. Bad things happen to bad people, good things happen to good people, and because we can see that's not real, we think it must happen after death. Well, there's no hard logic here, and even so, I'd accept reincarnation if there were cultural consensus, but it strikes out there too. I accept the afterlife, because cultures that never even heard of each other all believe it, and I can pull common threads to combine with science and figure something out about it. But no culture outside of India and its sphere of influence believes in reincarnation, and with no compelling logic to it, it's not something I'm going to buy.


In the end, it seems like wishful thinking. Bad people get their just desserts, and there's a good reason to be good, even if being bad gets you places in life. And even as wishful thinking, it doesn't work. Whether my next life is a dog or an eagle, I won't know the difference. And really, if that next life has none of my memories, is it even really me? If I die, and someone's born on the other side of the world with none of my memories, thoughts, or feelings, how can that be me?


If you know about the Ship of Theseus, you know what I'm talking about. If you don't, Theseus was a figure of Greek mythology, a prince of Athens who, understandably, raised objections to the fact that every nine years, the city of Athens had to send seven of its young men and seven young women to Crete to be eaten by a Minotaur who lived in a maze. Well, I'm sure I'm not spoiling the story too much when I say he killed the Minotaur, found his way out of the maze, and returned to Athens, where the ship was kept in a museum for generations. But where it was kept, they had it floating in a pool of water, and naturally it would rot, and different parts were replaced over time. In the end, not one piece of the original ship was still there, so was it really the Ship of Theseus? Bringing it full circle, if not one part of me survives in the new person, is that person me?


That being said, just because reincarnation probably isn't real doesn't mean Karma's not. If you're a selfish, backstabbing prick, it doesn't matter how many material rewards you have, you'll have no community and no real friends, while a generosity of spirit will lead to strong social ties. That's what matters in the end, ask any workaholic on their deathbed whether they wish they'd spent more time getting stuff or being with their friends and family. And if you like the idea of reincarnation, that's just fine. If it brings you peace, if it explains the world in a way that makes sense to you, I can't tell you it definitely doesn't exist. And since it makes no practical difference, you go on and believe it, nobody can tell you you're wrong for sure.