Greek, Norse, Daoist, Mayan, they've got plenty of differences, but one thing they all have in common is sacrifices of food and alcohol to the gods, accompanied by rituals and requests. While the specific practices are different, the core of the process is the same. Now look to the Yoruba culture, ancient China, ancient Egypt, and other cultures who have ancestor worship, the offerings to ghosts and gods are the same, usually alcohol, sugar, and fat, with a ritual and a request. That overlap suggests ancient cultures didn't usually draw hard lines between ghosts and gods, those came later. Now, I know what you're thinking, some gods claim to be all-powerful, but when do you ever see them backing up all that talk? Look through your favorite holy book or mythology, outside of the creation and apocalypse stories, when do they ever do anything that affects more than a few people? Sometimes they'll strain themselves and do a city or two, but they're never doing anything that has any effect outside of the particular region they're working with, and if you think they have, I'd like to see how your favorite myth with global impact affected another continent, if you wouldn't mind showing me.


That's why I say no matter who your favorite god is, he's just a local spirit with a power surplus and an ego, full of talk about what he did when nobody was watching and what hes going to do aaaaaany day now, just you watch. The difference between god and ghost is only the amount of energy they've got on hand to waste on making things happen. That suggests to me that there's the same core, Marzod, and without a body to live in, they draw energy to themselves. That's why they screw with electricity, why light gets a little strange around them, why they suck all the heat out of a room, why they act the way all the stories say they do. They draw in energy in all forms.


So why doesn't a ghost go drink the Sun and become a god? Why do they go where it's cold, dark, and quiet, no energy anywhere? Why have some ancient cultures been able to drive spirits off with drums and bonfires, while others attract them with the same thing? It's because it's not the presence of energy, it's the amount, compared to the power of the spirit you're dealing with. Too much outside energy all at once overwhelms a weak spirit, like radio waves getting drowned out by a stronger transmission. They need to absorb energy gradually, build up their tolerance before they can handle big blasts of it. They need time to process the energy into a form that's more stable for them.


What really separates a ghost from a god is this: A spirit focused on serving another spirit's needs is effectively adding itself to the master spirit. They're all connected anyway, all it takes is for one of them to see the other as master, and they establish a conduit. The master spirit draws on the energy of its followers. Now imagine the power of a spirit when he's got the collected energy of hundreds, thousands, millions of spirits at hand. As long as all its followers are on the same page, bending their will to his, he’s got massive potential.


Far as most of Hinduism goes, a ghost and a god being the same is no surprise at all, since every single thing in reality is a different manifestation of Brahman, so this idea just falls right in line. Will it surprise you at all to know the Bible agrees? Genesis 1:26-27 and Ephesians 4:24 both reference man being made in God's image, and I don't think it means the flesh and blood body. We've got the same thing in Sahih Muslim Hadith 2841, and Surah Sad 38:72, Surah Al-Hijr 15:29, and Surah As-Sajda 32:9 all say Allah breathed into man his spirit. Now, interpretation of Scripture is always subjective, and Islam outright rejects my reading here, but their objection is based in tradition, not Scripture. It's a difference of opinion, not a provable fact. And while knowing every twig of a particular tree is a valuable thing, you have to step back and look at the forest if you really want to understand trees.