As a concept, you can find Marzod all over the world under different names. China, Japan, India, Polynesia, Tibet, Greece, and South America, and sure, some of them got the idea from each other, but some got the idea all by themselves. Untold billions of people all through history describe the basic concept of an interconnected life force. Now, I've never seen five people agree on a lunch order, so looking for this many people to agree on the specifics of the force of life is pretty optimistic, of course there are differences. But at the core, the starting point is it's cosmic energy, and it exists inside every living thing, linking them together, despite seeming to be different.


Where the systems overlap, they tell us there's a force that flows through the body and cosmos. A lot of the systems say it travels through channels and accumulates at certain points, like an electrical circuit with a bunch of light bulbs. On the large scale, it flows through the Universe and gathers at certain points, like Earth, but let's focus on the small scale, the body. In the body, it's linked to health and function of body and mind, keeping them running as they should, and if they take damage, the force's flow is affected. Better alignment with the harmony of the Universe makes it do its work better. It's the force that allows connection between people that goes deeper than their ability to affect our physical lives, because the energy is all part of a whole, and all living things are interconnected. It can be in locations and objects based on their history or connection to divinity.


But then the beliefs start to split off from each other. In India, some Tantric beliefs split this force into two parts, Shiva, the thought, and Shakti, action. Hindu Kundalini says the energy lives at the base of the spine, and their practices are supposed to make it travel up to your brain. In Polynesia, Mana isn't really yours, it's something you gain or lose based on divine favor. Indian Prana and Tibetan Lung both focus on breath work to maintain the force, breathing in different patterns to make it flow better, while in China they say acupuncture stimulates certain nodes in the body where Qi gathers, and lots of Asian cultures use pressure therapy on the same theory, that the force is backed up in certain nodes. Greek Logos, or what later Western occultists called Aether, Quechuan Kawsay, Japanese Ki, Indian Brahman and Atman, just about everybody has something that fits the description of a cosmic, interconnected force that's doing inside your body what it's doing in the Universe.


So the common thread is there seems to be a force, which I call Marzod so as not to get bogged down in any baggage that comes along with the other names. It can't be seen, felt, or quantified, but it's what makes life alive. Where seed and egg come together, Marzod is the third, intangible piece that creates a new life, and if you're interested in the scientific side, the next book in this series will get into why this force can't be seen. Brass tacks, it exists on another plane that we're not equipped to perceive. Spirits are waves in an ocean that stretches through time and space, and what happens to one spirit ripples through and hits them all. Sometimes, people can connect their spirits to the greater whole, get past the individual they think they are, and that opens the door to telekinesis, telepathy, and prophecy, because you can see and do things from the perspective of another spirit across space and time.


Once it's exposed to influences, Marzod evolves to deal with its environment. Spirits start off the same, but develop differences, and the more different spirits are from each other, the weaker the connection, and the less influence they have on each other. There's a kind of convergent evolution that happens, spirits that prey on others will be in the same group, spirits that are only looking for shallow pleasures are in another, and it's a lot harder to connect across groups than inside them. I combined the elemental system of the Greeks (Water, Fire, Earth, Air, Aether) with the Chinese system (Water, Metal, Earth, Fire, Wood), because neither seemed to really capture the full scope, sorting different personalities into either of those systems seemed to always land “close enough” rather than giving a reliable answer. With Fire, Earth, and Water being mostly the same in both, and Aether just being one of the names of Marzod, I added Air, Wood, and Metal, and ended with seven elements, whose traits are mostly the traits assigned by the two parent systems, with a few reasonable extrapolations thrown in. Course, any sorting system accounts for more differences when you add more categories, it's always a balance between precision and ease of use, so you can always draw more lines if you think my system generalizes too much.


Marzod: Neutral, united, undifferentiated
Water: Compassionate, impulsive, social, content
Earth: Compassionate, structured, social, content
Metal: Dispassionate, structured, solitary, content
Air: Dispassionate, impulsive, solitary, ambitious
Wood: Predatory, structured, social, ambitious
Fire: Predatory, impulsive, solitary, ambitious


Whichever one you are, the farther another spirit is from your spot on the chain, the less you can communicate with it, because difference blocks communication. If you're a Fire spirit, talking to other Fire is no problem at all, and you can probably talk to Wood and maybe Air. With practice you might even stretch it to Metal and Earth, but there's no way, no how you will ever talk to Marzod or Water spirits. That many steps down the chain just can't happen, you're on totally different wavelengths. Look at Abrahamic Angels and Demons, Zoroastrian Light and Shadow beings, Hindu Asuras and Devas, Shinto Kami and Kegare, in all cases, the weaker spirit, the one with a smaller network of friends linked to it, just nopes right on out of the situation when its opposite shows up. Meanwhile, I couldn't possibly list for you all the cultures that have spirits sharing a body symbiotically, from Vodun and its descendants, to the shamanistic beliefs of any culture you care to name, to spirit mediums, you see like-minded spirits sharing a body with no problem at all. But like Marzod itself, I'm not saying all the systems are exactly the same, just showing the thread that runs through them.


Marzod is the name of the original, unevolved, neutral energy, but also the general name for any of its subdivisions. Water, Fire, Metal, they're all still Marzod, just like all colors are still light. They look different, but at the core they're made of the same thing. Any of them can attach to a new life, as long as the Marzod isn't already attached to an identity. The nature of the life has some effect too. While a human can be any element, you'll never see a rattlesnake that's aligned with Water, it's not within their abilities to be compassionate, they're not social animals.


When a person dies, their spirit is usually reabsorbed into the whole, but sometimes it's left behind as a ghost. The person carried this spirit, this piece of a whole, all through their lives, and left an imprint of themselves on it. It's left to wander around on Earth, and it can possess a new body, but it can't really live in it, because a spirit who already has an identity can't go off and become someone else, its being wrapped up in its identity is the whole reason it's still here. So sure, it can overpower another spirit and puppet its body around, but it can't really belong there. It can't attach to the new identity, because it's still the old one. Given time, maybe it learns to let go, but until then, it's stuck.


Marzod started off fully interconnected, with limitless potential, but it changed as it responded to its environment. Those changes set up all kinds of roadblocks on what spirits it could talk to, what lives it could have, what it would be like. From the ability to do anything, it narrowed it down to a single avenue, forced down a path, a product of its own self-imposed limits. Isn't that true of all of us? Most of the things you can't do are because of the choices you made.