I bet you thought the Hindi would get off easy, huh? I've talked a lot about the God of Abraham, and how his followers got the whole thing wrong and they should have been paying attention to what they're saying over in India. But I'm nothing if not even-handed, so let's talk about Hinduism, and where they might want to re-examine some things. First stop, vegetarianism. As with the Abrahamic faiths, I approach this with respect, and if you want to keep tradition on this, well, that's really up to you.


Let's talk about plants first. As living things, they have spirits, and by what possible logic do you say one spirit is worth more than another? Because it has a face? Because it's cute and cuddly? Because it can move around more? Because its brain is centralized? You know those aren't good arguments, come on, is your respect for the sanctity of life, your ability to care about someone, really and truly based on how smart you think they are?


In the view that ending the life of a living thing is not a good thing to do, killing a plant should logically be just as bad as killing an animal. Unfortunately, there is just no way to avoid killing things if you want to live in the world. Every single thing you will ever, have ever, or could ever eat for nourishment was once living, and had to be killed for your benefit. And then there's the rest of your life, how many plants and animals died in the construction of your house, the roads you travel on, the businesses that provide things you need to live in any measure of comfort? Every single moment of your life is built on the blood of plants and animals. Or, for plants, I guess it's sap, but anyway.


So is this nihilism? Am I saying there's no point trying if you can't be 100%? Course not, that's a stupid, infantile, counterproductive attitude, and if any of you think that way, shame on you, I mean it. Every effort counts, and a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step, to paraphrase an old Chinese saying attributed to various authors. I'm saying, if you can't help but kill living things to continue your life, you kill as few as possible. And that means eating meat.


Counterintuitive, isn't it? But think about it. Meat has over double the calories per pound that plants do, on average, and let's not even get into how many plants go into those pounds, where with animals we're talking about pounds per animal. Even in the graded consciousness schools of thought, where there's a hierarchy of life forms, the incredible mass of lower life forms involved in a vegetarian diet must outweigh the value of the cute, cuddly little animal lives, right? Think about how many millions more life forms you'll kill in the course of a vegetarian life. Is it really balancing out in your favor, Karmically speaking?


But, I know, climate change. Raising livestock is a big contributor, and I won't deny it, it's pretty egregious. But the problem isn't the livestock, it's how it's being raised, it's the corporate overlords raising these animals in misery and suffering, with no regard for the planet they're destroying in the process. Refusing to buy from them is using your single vote to say you don't approve, but you know what's even better? Supporting their competition, the small, non-corporate, ethical ranchers with sustainable practices. The little guys bleed the big one, and the longer they stick around, the more blood they take. Keeping them in business is much more harmful to the corporate pricks than a full boycott of meat, use your vote to do that instead.


But isn't a vegetarian diet healthier? Not one bit. Overconsumption of meat is bad, sure, but not consuming it at all? I tried to go vegetarian once, not for health or moral reasons, but financial ones, and let me tell you, without meat malnutrition is a beast. It's almost impossible to balance your diet correctly with no meat, because guess what, we evolved to eat meat from time to time, that's why our ancestors used to chase mammoths around with pointy sticks, it wasn't just good exercise, they actually needed it. You CAN make it work, but getting all the vitamins, minerals, and calories you need is real, constant work. And as we've explored, it's really not helping your Karmic standing, so how about you just make the whole thing easier and more Karmically aligned, and put some meat in your diet?


Look, end of the day, both sides can be defended on practical, moral, and ethical grounds, and the strengths and weaknesses of either will mostly come down to how, not what. If the answer was definitive, nobody would still be asking the question. Nobody's doing what they do for stupidity or evil, or at least, those kind are very much in the minority. All I can tell you is how I see it, and if you don't like it, you're free to eat all the plants you want.