On the Mediterranean coastline of Mesopotamia is what's called the Levant region. This is where the Canaanites lived, and where we'd see the Israelites a little later. The Canaanites' roots go way back, being between Egypt and Mesopotamia, they saw a lot of trade going back and forth, and some of their oldest cities, like Jericho and Byblos, are as old as anything you'd find anywhere else. Being right between two powerful, advanced cultures, it got the chance to absorb both of them, and by 3000 BCE they very solidly had their own separate culture going. Go forward to 2000 BCE, you see Hazor, Megiddo, Ugarit, and Sidon in full swing, and Amorites migrating in from the north added their own flavor to the mix.


Like Mesopotamia, Canaan had an extremely long list of gods that really aren't worth going into unless you're a specialist in this area, and if you are, why are you reading my book to try to learn about it? I'm sure you can find a better source of information. This book being a high-altitude flyover, giving enough information to get on with but not much extra detail, the main Canaanite gods are:


Ba'al, not actually a god, just a title that means lord, so the god they're always fighting in the early Old Testament could be just about anybody, really
El, King of the Gods and god of creation
Asherah, queen of the gods, wife of El
Hadad, god of storms, sometimes King of the Gods instead of El, and probably the guy being referred to if someone says "Ba'al" without further context
Shapash, goddess or god of the Sun
Aglibol, god of the Moon
Attar, god of the morning star, whose role, name, and gender pretty much depended on who you asked
Arsu, god of the evening star and protector of caravans
Arsay, goddess of the Underworld
Ashima, goddess of fate
Yahweh, storm god most likely originating in the southern Levant


I bet you saw a familiar name on that list, right? That's right, it's the same guy. While Yahweh's origins aren't totally clear, it's known for sure that he was in the Canaanite Pantheon, and that the Israelites are a rogue sect of Canaanites. See, the thing is, the Israelites are genetically identical to the Canaanites, and lived in the same area, so if you're going to try to argue they're not from the same stock, you're going to have a hard time. I know they didn't cover this in Sunday School, but history is complicated and they only had you one day a week, they had to prioritize. The leading theory today, suggested by George Mendenhall and Norman Gottwald, both of whom have resumes as long as your arm, says the Israelites were Canaanite peasants who rejected the hierarchy, as people at the bottom of a hierarchy often do, took the god of their ancestors, and hit the road, rejecting the gods of their oppressors. And nobody's saying they were wrong, so unbunch your panties there, for all I know the Israelites just saw a deeper truth than their neighbors, so don't let my repeating historical facts set you off.


Around 1200 BCE, right around the time the Israelites were fed up with the Canaanites' crap, Egyptian dominance was heavy in the area. Egypt was in its New Kingdom phase, and it really wanted more desert, because they didn't already have enough sand or something, so they took a lot of Canaan. The Amarna Letters come from this time, letters written between Pharaohs and rulers of Canaanite cities, where the people were slaves in service to the Egyptians. Now, scholars will say at this point that they weren't slaves, they were compulsory laborers. That's BS, and I'll tell you why.


Imagine tomorrow morning, I come by your house bright and early with a bullwhip, and I tell you you're going to come do some yard work for me or else. By afternoon, your hands will be bleeding and blistered, you'll be hurting in all your muscles and joints, parts of you you never even knew were there, because I've got a lot of work backed up and I'll sure be taking the opportunity not to have to do it myself. And I'll be standing over there with my whip, calling over "put your back into it, I don't have all day, I want to be done by suppertime!" You say "I can't take any more of this slave labor, you're going to kill me!" That's when I'll say "actually, this is just compulsory labor, I don't really own you." I bet you'd find the energy real quick to put your foot all the way up my ass, because who cares? That's not a distinction that needs to be made.


So, the Canaanites were Egyptian slaves, making bricks, as seen in both archaeological records and the Bible, book of Exodus, and you can bet the peasants, who'd soon become the Israelites, were doing the heavy lifting on that project. Now, Egyptian records don't tell us what happened next, but they wouldn't, because the god-king thing was very important to the Pharaohs, and they didn't record anything embarrassing. The book of Exodus tells us God sent plagues, those being turning the Nile to blood, an infestation of frogs, then flies, then mass death of the livestock, then boils, thunderstorm, locusts, three days of darkness, and wrapping it up with death of the firstborn. Now, I can't tell you Moses definitely went and talked to Pharaoh. I can't tell you God sent plagues. But I can tell you, with zero shred of doubt, something poisoned the Nile and wrecked everybody's week.


Why am I so sure? Because these plagues start with the Nile being bad, and while the rest of them are presented as separate events, they're exactly what would happen if the water got a heavy dose of something unpleasant. Frogs get the hell out of there, flies are everywhere, because suddenly there's a lot of extra dead bodies from the bad water, dead livestock, dead people. There's a certain algae bloom that's suggested pretty often here, that would turn the Nile red, like blood, and maybe a volcanic eruption nearby to cover the three days of darkness. I don't know about those, it could easily be those are just extra dramatic touches, but I will tell you absolutely, the Nile got a heavy dose of poison, and I believe it specifically because that's not the story the Bible's selling, but it fits like a glove. You can say God did it or not, and Moses was involved or he wasn't, but the part about the Nile definitely happened.


Now, I'm not saying that event and what followed are the reason the Israelites got cut loose. Truth is, Egypt had a lot going on. It was the end of the 19th Dynasty, Ramesses II had just died, there was a civil war, lots of Pharaohs coming and going, and it's entirely possible some less important projects, like brickmaking in Canaan, fell through the cracks. While we can't say for sure Exodus happened in this time, empires have to choose priorities pretty often, so you can pretty much pick any year you want, the Egyptians would have had a good reason not to be paying too much attention over there. Add to that, the major players in the Levant had just collapsed, those being the Hittites and Mycenaeans, primarily. So with authority a little nebulous, the main threats suddenly not so scary, and having just been forced to work a big construction project against their will, that would make the perfect time for the Israelites to say "you know what, it's been fun, but it's mostly been the opposite of that, bye," and split off from the Canaanites, heading off into the hills.


It's not too surprising the Israelites started off as an egalitarian culture. They'd just left a society with strict social hierarchy, they weren't looking to copy it, so when the Bible says they had no kings, well, I'm inclined to believe it. It didn't last very long, because there's always some prick who wants to be the top dog, egalitarianism just doesn't ever last, but I'm sure it was nice for a while. Biblically, the Israelites demanded a king, wouldn't be dissuaded, so God gave in, and Saul was so dead set against being crowned that he went and hid, but they found him and forced it on him. And my answer to that is yeah, that's what I'd say too if I schemed my way to the top of my tribe and didn't want future generations to know what a colossal prick I was.


Regardless, over the next few centuries, the Canaanite culture evolved, they became the Phoenicians, spreading all over the Mediterranean, becoming master sailors and spreading their alphabet, the root of the Greek and Latin characters, and the Philistines moved in toward the south, near Egypt. The Israelites, and later the Judahites, made their kingdoms in the highlands, and that's when we're to believe Joshua conquered Canaan. Now, I'm not here to tell you the Bible isn't true, but I'm definitely here to tell you Jericho had no wall at the time Joshua blew his trumpet, and hadn't for about 200 years, and that's if you take the word of tradition, that this happened around 1400 BCE. That wall was knocked down in 1600 BCE, probably by an earthquake, and modern scholars say the Israelites didn't even split from the Canaanites till 1200 BCE, so by that math, we're looking at around 500 years with no wall, so how would Joshua knock it down, either way? Could be an honest mistake, maybe he blew his trumpet before he really got a good look, and then when he saw there was no wall he figured it'd worked, but it is an archaeological fact that Jericho hadn't had a wall in centuries by the time this was supposedly happening, and Ai and Jericho were never conquered anywhere near the necessary timeframe. But, okay. I'll believe the Bible over archaeology, why not, Joshua 10:40 says he killed every last person in Canaan, which really seems unethical to me, but God was okay with it just this once.


But let's not harp on that, applying modern morality to ancient myth, because the truth is no mythology or history consistently holds up to morality as it shifts from one generation to the next. Let's talk instead about the theological shift that happened around 550 BCE, when Jerusalem was conquered by Babylon, and all the Jewish elites were shuttled off to be held hostage. It's only after the exile to Babylon that God becomes not the supreme god, but the only one. Check out Exodus 15:11, Exodus 20:3, Deuteronomy 5:7, Deuteronomy 6:14-15, Deuteronomy 32:8-9, Psalm 82:1, Psalm 86:8, Psalm 95:3, Psalm 97:7, Exodus 34:14, 1 Kings 8:23, Jeremiah 10:11, read all of them, with the knowledge that Yahweh in the Canaanite Pantheon is an unassailable historical fact, and tell me you really believe these verses mean to imply other gods straight up do not exist. These verses show competition with and intolerance of other gods, and you can try to twist it into being some metaphor if you really want to, but that's not going to change what the Bible actually says.


Course, there are some verses that say God is the only one who exists, and those are found after the royalty of Jerusalem were exposed to Zoroastrianism in Babylon. During and after Babylon, you start finding talk of a divine cosmic plan, Satan as the ultimate bad guy, reward and punishment based afterlife, angelology, and monotheism rather than henotheism, which we just talked about, the belief that other gods exist but are forbidden. You go on, find me any of that in the older books. This was the root of the split between the Pharisees and Saducees, the Saducees kept the old law and old beliefs, and the Pharisees, being made up of the royalty and elite, had plenty of time to talk about Zoroastrianism on their vacation in Babylon and decided it made a lot of sense. And now that they had Heaven and Hell to worry about, they decided, in their words, to build a fence around the Torah, making a bunch of extra rules so nobody could ever even come close to breaking a real commandment. Can't take chances with your eternal soul, can you?


But that's not to say the new beliefs are wrong. Maybe God didn't say lots of things in explicit terms, that doesn't mean it's not true. You can't expect him to tell you about every atom of the Universe, and even if something's important, he may have a very good reason to keep it from you. Adam and Eve had less knowledge in the Garden, but they were definitely happier than most of us today. Sometimes God keeps his people ignorant on purpose, then some Babylonian named Zoroaster or a snake in a tree comes along and screws the whole thing up. In the end, all I can do is throw you the facts, you're the only one who can decide what they mean to you.


Part Three: Mythology