One of the earliest gods was the Sun. Early man picked up pretty quick that moving around at night got his friends eaten and didn't result in finding food too often, so the Sun was most likely our first god, protecting us from predators and bringing us success in our hunting and gathering days. Every culture, everywhere worshipped the Sun at some point, it's the cultural touchstone we know we'll find anywhere we look. We can also find stories of beings not too different from us, some being big, mean brutes who'd beat us up if we looked at them sideways, and some being tricky little bastards who'd distract us and steal our stuff while we weren't looking. Those became giants, trolls, ogres, leprechauns, elves, all kinds of stuff in our stories, but were probably really just other primates in the original versions. If you think about it, that's what life in Africa must have been like for early humans, surrounded by things that kind of look like us, but are either much bigger or much smaller, and we didn't always play nice together.


But back to gods, after the Sun, they'd be animistic. They'd be animals, mountains, rivers, whatever, and these gods weren't that powerful. The Bear God, obviously, is fairly limited, but since you can't beat him up, you appease him with respect and offerings so he doesn't come eat your village. That's what a god was, early on, a thing you can't beat up, but whose favor or forbearance you needed, like large predators, rain, really any number of things. And as these people hit their geographical bottlenecks, they'd bring their gods along for the ride. The idea of these gods would mingle with the local gods, and several things might happen.


First possibility, the locals might think your god is a really good idea, and they'd bring some version of it into their Pantheon, with his position in the hierarchy being determined by how important your culture was to the local culture, and mostly by which culture could beat up the other. Or they might have a god who's just like yours, so you all agree it's just the same guy under a different name. Both ways were the root of extensive polytheism seen in ancient cultures, and the second possibility is where gods started to take a recognizable form. See, these similar gods weren't exact copies, so they might keep the same main power, but then they'd get a ton of lesser powers as footnotes, and that's what evolved Steve, God of Bears, into Steve, God of Justice, Divine Order, Balance, and Bears. That's why Ra became Amun-Ra, why Marduk took the roles of older Mesopotamian gods, why if you look up the Greco-Roman gods they come with the domains everyone knows, and then a list of footnotes as long as your arm. Once the ancient people started merging gods together based on each being a different facet of the whole, you can see why monotheism was the next step.


It's absolutely logical, if you think about it. The next step after lumping together gods with similar domains and powers was always going to be lumping together the ones who aren't similar at all, but are on the same team. Why shouldn't Mars, revered God of War, just be the aspect of Jupiter, God of Justice, when there's divine smiting to be done? Once you've introduced multiple facets to a god's domain, why not grab them all? The Olympian Gods can just be Olympus, one god with twelve facets. Now, that didn't actually happen, as far as I know, but it's the idea behind having a single god, like the Zoroastrians or the Jewish people and their descendant religions.


So what's the point here? Am I saying there are no gods, and it's all just the growth and evolution of the category "things we can't beat up?" Course not, I believe one hundred percent that ancient people were accidentally stumbling into contact with higher dimensions, and that's why magic, spirits, and gods have so much similarity across cultures, and why highly advanced scientific concepts have started backing these things up, and you'll never talk me out of it. I'm just saying don't be overly attached to the specific mythology behind your god, because I guarantee you one hundred percent that is not his original factory packaging. But do you really care? If your ritual to invoke Zeus connects you to a spirit who cares about justice, and the stories about Zeus let you understand better how to interact with this spirit and what to expect from it, do you really care if he never killed Cronos? Seems to me you'd be focusing on the wrong thing there.