If we're talking about the Middle East, you know we're starting with Mesopotamia. It's the earliest known center of civilization, because it's located right at the bottleneck formed by the Red, Black, and Mediterranean Seas, you couldn't leave your continent back then without hitting Mesopotamia. It was the first melting pot, a filter that caught all the good ideas from three continents, and it's why the Mesopotamian Pantheon had a jaw-dropping three thousand gods in it. I thought it important I not write that number in digits, because you'd definitely have thought I accidentally put on an extra zero or two. Mesopotamia got started around 4000 BCE, and was mostly made up of Sumerians and Akkadians, with Elamites as neighbors to the east and Canaanites to the south, in the Middle Eastern deserts and hills.


But as I was saying, Mesopotamia had about 3,000 gods. Don't worry, I won't tell you about all of them, just the important ones. In my opinion, "important" means "ranks high enough to have a celestial body dedicated to them," but even there, it was variable by region. Mesopotamians all had different ideas on the Pantheon hierarchy, as you might expect with all those gods. Every city had their patron deity who they'd insist was chief of all the other gods, and they'd rank the other gods based on how friendly they were with the city the god came from. It was a real mess, but what I'm about to tell you here is what's generally accepted by the majority of scholars. If your favorite Mesopotamian god didn't make the cut, well, sorry, maybe he should have applied himself more and got himself a planet.


Anu of Uruk, associated with the Equatorial Sky and luludanitu stone. This was the creator god.
Enlil of Nippur, associated with the Northern Sky and lapis lazuli stone. God of wind, air, earth, and storms. He had the largest cult, and he's generally considered the benevolent and fatherly chief of gods.
Enki of Eridu, associated with the Southern Sky and jasper stone. God of the subterranean freshwater ocean, magic, wisdom, and crafts. 
Marduk of Babylon, associated with Jupiter. He replaced Enlil as chief in 1900 BCE when Babylon rose to power under Hammurabi. His original role isn't well documented, but from his later roles, subtracting the ones he likely got as chief when he took over from Enlil, it was probably agriculture.
Nabu of Borsippa and Kalhu, associated with Mercury. God of writing, he grew extremely popular by the late first millennium BCE, with a wide reach across nearby areas.
Sin of Ur and Harran, god of the Moon.
Utu of Sippar and Larsa, associated with the Sun. God of truth, justice, and morality.
Ishtar of Uruk, associated with Venus, goddess of love, sex, and war. She was the most important and prominent female deity, and most myths involve her trying to usurp other gods.
Ninurta of Nippur, Girsu, and Lagash, associated with Saturn. God of war and agriculture.
Nergal of Kutha, associated with Mars. God of destruction, fire, war, and plague. Pretty much, if lots of people were dying, this was the guy doing it.
Ereshkigal of Kutha, associated with the Hydra constellation. Goddess of the Underworld and death.
Nanaya of Uruk and Kish, associated with the Corona Borealis. Goddess of love.
Ninshubur of Akkil, associated with the Orion constellation. Sukkal, or advisor, of Ishtar, which was definitely not an enviable job. Ishtar was always stirring up trouble, and Ninshubur had to go get her out of it.


These deities all had temples, most of them in several cities, and a statue of them in it. This statue would be seen as a kind of secondary body, or a conduit to the god itself. They'd be fed, clothed, worshipped, and they'd have their own carriage and boat on standby waiting to take them to battlefields or other places where you might want your god keeping an eye on things. The priests were also the rulers of the city, and it's not actually recorded anywhere, but you'd have to think the people got a little suspicious after a while that the gods always wanted whatever the King wanted. In Uruk, Cuneiform was invented, the very first writing system, which if you don't know is a really big deal for any organized civilization, but probably people were more excited about agriculture, the plow, the wheel, and irrigation, because those had some fairly tangible benefits in surplus food and trade, hallmarks of any advanced culture. Agriculture in particular is the reason big cities are even possible, why we don't run out of food.


Around 2300 BCE, the Akkadians got an upper hand and started collecting Sumerian cities like they were baseball cards, making the world's first empire under King Sargon, right on the north tip of the Persian Gulf. They replaced Sumerian culture with their own, to what extent they were able, and this was where the first standardized system of weights and measures came in. Up till then, each city had their own measurement system, and if a few cities did a lot of trade together they might agree on one, but generally it was a real mess trying to figure out how much of anything there was, and the Akkadians didn't like that. They realized there was a lot of stuff in the world, and they wanted to count it all. The empire lasted about 180 years, until it was knocked down by invasions from the Gutian tribes and internal revolts from people who didn't like this new "empire" invention. The Guti kept control of Sumer for a good long while after that.


The Sumerians did get back on top, though. Around 2100 BCE, under King Ur-Nammu, the Code of Ur-Nammu was written, which was pretty lucky since that title would have made no sense under any other king. It was the first known codified law, based on more than "if you piss me off, I'll beat you till you wish you hadn't." It had it all, property rights, penalties, heavy emphasis on justice and restitution to victims of crimes, it was actually pretty groundbreaking for its time. Sumer had a great time for a while, with lots of writing, temples being built left and right, and an efficient administration. It barely lasted a century, though, before the Elamites invaded and sacked the city of Ur, but don't feel too bad for the Sumerians, they started it. The Amorites moved in and took over, and the Sumerians never really got another minute in the spotlight.


Around 1900, the city of Babylon got in on this empire fad, and the Amorite King Hammurabi took just about all of Mesopotamia, writing the Code of Hammurabi, which was another striking coincidence in law code titling. This one was really heavy on different types of punishment for different crimes, and was the first one to establish the presumption of innocence. Marduk, patron god of Babylon, got his fifteen minutes of fame, going from D-list celebrity to Mesopotamia's headliner, taking over from Enlil as chief of the gods. Hammurabi's successors didn't do as well as he did, losing quite a bit of territory, and finally Babylon was sacked by Hittites around 1600 BCE. Babylonian culture was established, though, and was always the go-to in that region afterward.


Around 1400 BCE, the Assyrians developed a military based on heavy cavalry use, iron weapons and armor, and innovations in siege warfare that led them to absolutely dominate the battlefield and establish the Assyrian Empire. Like the Romans who came later, the Assyrians knew the importance of roads and armies, and were extremely good at both. They exiled troublesome tribes in their new empire, set up provincial governors, and built the Library at Ninevah, which was a library in one of the cities around there, maybe Babylon, and is where modern people found the Epic of Gilgamesh, the oldest known literary work. They had the longest run, lasting 750 years before the Babylonians and Medes took Ninevah, which pretty much crushed what was left of the empire by then. Babylon was back on top.


Nebuchadnezzar II rebuilt Babylon, probably with the help of at least a few other people, and built the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, which, it should be noted, didn't actually hang. The Greek word translated there usually means "overhanging," and has a broader meaning in Greek, so what we're really talking about here is a garden built on several different levels, which is a lot less impressive. Still, it must have been pretty cool to be one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Astronomy, math, and law were big in the new city, same as they'd always been. The military did a lot of raiding in the Levant to the south, and eventually tried taking on Egypt, which didn't work out at all, so they went back to the Levant and conquered Jerusalem instead, who'd been giving Babylon some trouble on the theory that Egypt would bail them out if it hit the fan, but that turned out not to be a solid bet at all. The King of Jerusalem was killed, his heir and a lot of other elites taken hostage, and the heir's uncle put on the throne.


In the end, the Babylonian Empire only lasted about a century before it fell to the Persians. Cyrus the Great really wasn't a fan of guests, so he made a big point of returning all displaced people to their homes. The Persians played the empire game about as well as anyone, with standardized coinage, roads, and, under the rulers who came after Cyrus, a military that went to war with Greece, a decision that famously did not work out for them one bit. It was back and forth for about 50 years, the Persians would take some Greek cities, put some harsh tyrant in charge to teach them a lesson about obedience, and the Greeks would, every single time, fail to learn this lesson and send their new ruler packing. This heavily informs the story of Alexander the Great, who headed east with his Macedonian army in 330 BCE, about a century later, and put an end to the Persian Empire. Now, Alexander was a great fighter, but not a very good King, and he mostly lost all his territory to revolt pretty much as soon as the dust had settled behind him on the road he left on. But Mesopotamia was an exception, being ruled by one of his generals after the conquest, and lasting a good century as the Seleucid Empire.


The Seleucid Empire was hugely successful for a while, taking all of Mesopotamia and a good chunk of the surrounding area, finally butting up against Egypt and India, neither of whom budged. Things were going so well, in fact, that around 200 BCE, King Antiochus decided it'd be a great idea to go conquer Greece and this upstart little republic they were allied with, some backwater punks who called themselves Rome. Of all the things that didn't work out for people in this history, this didn't work out the most. Antiochus got sent back home, short a useful portion of his military and owing a huge debt to Greece and Rome in return for being allowed to live. And while the Seleucids went on for some time after that, calling them an empire would be extremely generous. The Parthians knocked them down in pretty short order, and Persia was back in control.


In 63 BCE, Pompey the Great, no relation to Cyrus the Great, as far as I could find, conquered Syria for Rome. With Rome's control established in the Levant and the Parthians in Mesopotamia, the stage was set for 250 years of war between them. The wars after, with the rest of Persia, would last another 500 years, past the fall of the Western Roman Empire and into the Byzantine Empire. It ended inconclusively, as both powers were then attacked by the early Muslim Caliphates, and they both decided they'd rather get conquered by these new guys than keep fighting each other, so they called off their war. But those are things to talk about in histories of the Byzantine Empire or the Caliphates. This is where we'll leave off for Mesopotamia, an area that left a strong legacy as the most influential of three continents, and the birthplace of civilization.