Marzod is another word for Aether, an outdated word in today's scientific world, but what it means is a quantum field, the thing all matter and energy is made from. Depending on the type of field generated, you can take your pick of all 118 elements of the periodic table. String theory tells us what makes the fields different. Nutshell version, rather than each molecule being a speck, it's a string, the rest of the string sticking off in a higher dimension we can't see, we can only see the tiny section of the string that vibrates in a way we're equipped to perceive. Different vibrations, different quantum fields, different elements.


To make it clearer, let's talk about sound. I'm sure you know sound exists in a wide band, some of it we can hear, some we can't, like a dog whistle. Now, imagine you could only hear sound in a much, much narrower band than you already do. Let's say I've got a guitar, and I pluck the top string, the big E. It's vibrating all over the string, and the further you get from the bridge, the more it's waving around. You, with your limitation, can only hear the part of the string about an inch from the bridge, but that doesn't stop the rest of the string from being there, does it? Just means you can only perceive a tiny part.


That's string theory, that all matter isn't made up of particles, but strings, and you can only perceive the part that vibrates a certain way. Now, you can hear that big E about an inch from the bridge, but if I pluck the A string, it's thinner, it vibrates more, you have to move closer to the bridge for the part you can hear, say half an inch. For the D string, a quarter inch. G, B, and small E, you can't hear those at all. Expand this back to the Universe, you can only interact with the part of the string that vibrates the right way, the rest is invisible, intangible, you can't interact with it at all through your five basic senses.


Now, you can't expect all the strings in the Universe to carry the same tune forever. Within certain bounds, that's fine, it creates a new element maybe, or the laws of physics hiccup a little in a certain spot, but the Universe keeps playing its song. Sometimes, though, part of the orchestra starts playing the wrong tune, they're copying their neighbor rather than watching the conductor. When we're talking about Marzod, the building blocks of reality, that makes its own little section of a new reality totally different from ours, where our elements, our laws of physics, our understanding of everything, gets swept out and replaced. When that happens, we call it a black hole. There's no known upper limit on how far matter can be compressed, so there may be worlds in there smaller than quarks, with life forms that can't even begin to imagine the size and scope of their universe, only a black hole to us.


If that last thought made you feel big and powerful, hang on while I shrink you back down, Alice in Wonderland style. Our Universe, with its 118 elements, is very intricate, very complex. It's a long way from the original Universe of Marzod, which you might as well call the single cell organism all universes evolved from. That means that our Universe, in all its wonderful, intricate complexity, is most likely a black hole, within a black hole, within a black hole, hundreds or even thousands of times, each one just a little more complex than the last. Imagine our Universe, boundless to us, as a tiny percentage of space inside another universe which is itself just a tiny percentage of space inside another, repeated until you get to the original Marzod, the biggest universe of all. It must be the same way people felt when they figured out those tiny pricks of light in the sky were giant suns, each surrounded by planets, stretching out into infinity.


But these universes aren't permanent. Black holes put out Hawking Radiation, which is a fancy name for the fact that as a black hole ages, it loses its density. Things tend toward balance, and the black holes return to being more like the rest of our universe. Remember when you were a kid, and you looked at adults and thought of how you'd do everything different, you could never be like them, it's impossible? Look at you now. Time showed you why things are the way they are, smoothed out your rough edges, now you're one of those adults, with kids looking at you saying "that'll never be me." Universes are like that, it just takes hundreds of billions of years to see any change as they all evolve back to the original Marzod.