When a new universe begins, it's only Marzod, Marzod that became so different from the rest of its universe that they couldn't exist together. Alternate laws of reality formed, and the new Marzod exists as a hole in reality within the old universe. To us, that's a black hole, to the ones inside, it's a boundless expanse, whose limits they can't fully imagine in a way that does it justice. This is called the Black Hole Cosmology Hypothesis, if you want to look into it more and see I didn't just make up something because it was cool. Moving from one universe to the other involves such huge shifts in reality itself that there's no chance a living being could survive it. Do you think you could live in a universe made of mashed potatoes, where your blood exists outside your body, three miles away, and termites who communicate in shades of the color blue are the dominant species? Probably not, and all the stuff I just described is stuff you recognize and have words to describe, so imagine how much worse it can get.


But Marzod doesn't just sit there, it starts to change. In a way, it's the first choice within that universe. Then other bits of Marzod change in response. Soon the whole batch of it is changing just as fast as it can, all parts in competition with each other, feeding on each other, going from gas to solid matter to planets, where life sparks and evolves, all fighting each other, everyone trying to get one over on the rest, from evolutionary arms races to more literal arms races, involving higher intelligence and even gods. The Hindi see this as Brahman manifesting Prakriti, matter, and Purusha, consciousness, and if you're wondering, they're locked in an eternal struggle too. No form of Marzod likes anything very different from itself, sees it as a threat, and it'll change to get a leg up on the competition. But conservation of energy is important at all levels, and it usually won't jump too high, just enough to get an edge, so maybe you get a prophet instead of a god, or something even tamer, like a new rock, just enough to advance a tiny bit.


This creates a system of cause and effect, and nothing can happen outside that loop, so in a way, everything was predetermined from the moment of the very first universe of the very first Marzod, because you can't have any effect without a cause. You've never really made a decision in your life, it was made for you, because some stimulus caused an expression of chemicals in your brain, a firing of electrons, so you couldn't help but think what you thought and do what you did. One thing reacts to another, and the outcome may have too many variables to be predictable, but it was always inevitable. Newton said if you knew the location and velocity of every particle in the Universe, you could predict everything, forever, but that was impossible because the more you know its location, the less you know its velocity, and that cuts both ways. LaPlace's Demon is pretty much the same thing, that if you knew all causes, you'd know all effects, but that's just not practical.


But that doesn't mean everything is written and you can stop trying to do anything. The struggle is written too, and nothing can happen without it, because there's still other forces trying to bring THEIR will forward. If you do nothing, that's written too, and probably means your failure is written shortly after. Remember there's no effect without cause, and most of the things you want are effects of your causes. Does it really matter that your causes are also effects? If you choose inaction, what do you think is written from there? You can see it in Greek myths, the Moirai, or Fates, had everything predetermined, but that didn't absolve the heroes of their responsibility to be heroic, because how is the path ever going to get there if nobody struggles to make it happen?


But the struggle has its limits, and at some point the disharmony gets too out of hand. It's too much for the universe to tolerate, the rules of reality get bent past their breaking point. One thing that can happen, we know already, is a black hole. But sometimes it's less dramatic, it's only an ice age or a meteor or the fall of a civilization. Ask the Norse, the Mayans, the Hindi, this is not the first world to ever exist, the slate has been wiped before, by Ragnarok, the Five Suns, Pralaya. The world is born, life happens, struggles, the planet gets wiped clean, and it starts over again. If you expand your mythological net there, look into previous types of human, failed drafts, so to speak, that got wiped off the board and everything reset, that myth has an echo in pretty much every culture.


Why is that? Why does every culture think the world keeps getting reset? Because it's happening, every time evolution, instead of giving some animal fangs or a stinger or camouflage, gives it time travel or antigravity or something else that can't exist. Sometimes a god can find a way to exist without breaking everything, even though he technically shouldn't, but if things go too far, the Marzodian reset gets hit, at least in a localized area. Marzod's need for balance kicks in, and with no response to this new thing, it's nope, sorry, that's out of bounds, everybody back to your starting positions. And if it's too big to wipe out with a cataclysm, it turns into a black hole instead, and the creation of a whole new Universe. Marzod says "as long as you're under my roof, young man, you'll live by my laws of reality," and the new Marzod packs up, punches a hole in reality, and starts a new universe where it can do whatever it wants.


Course, if it's a systemic issue rather than a localized one, that's when the entire Universe gets tanked. And that's bad news for just about everybody, including all the black holes, and all the black holes within them, and all the black holes within those. The collapse of one universe could easily mean the collapse of hundreds or even thousands of universes. So, you know, maybe it'd be a good idea if you did your part to promote balance and unity. Next time you have a choice between selfishness and generosity, or anger and forgiveness, consider that your choice might be the straw that breaks the Marzod's back. Next time someone cuts you off in traffic, remember thousands of universes might hang on whether you honk or let it go.