Look, I won't lie to you, this is going to be a tough one. We're dealing with time and relativity, and that's never easy, we're just not designed to understand time in any way but forward at a certain rate. Still, I'll do my best to write it, and if you do your best to read it, I think we'll get there.


According to Hubble's Law, the Universe is constantly expanding, which probably isn't news to you. What may be news is Dark Energy, which is, against all known physics, making us pick up speed as we go. In my theory, the reason for that is a special particle I call Marzod, a particle that has negative mass. According to Einstein's Mass-Energy Equivalence, matter and energy are the same thing in different states, so if you plot the states of matter on a line, you've got Solid, Liquid, Gas, Plasma, and "Plasma" is usually divided by type of energy rather than mass, but it's division by mass that's important to my theory. See, you've got heavy energy, which is dark matter, that's energy that's so close to being matter it's got some of matter's most basic qualities, and at the other end of the scale, you've got photons, with no mass at all.


Now, according to String Theory, more vibration makes less mass, so the photons are vibrating a lot, while solids hardly at all. The big question is, what happens when you make a photon vibrate harder, channel more energy into it? You'd get a particle that responds opposite to everything, it goes through time backward, if you push it left it goes right, all kinds of weird stuff, because our Universe is built on positive mass, and negative mass would allow your mutated photon to go faster than light, it'd do everything wrong, according to theories involving tachyons or CPT symmetry. It would even have opposite gravity, responding the wrong way to Newton's Universal Gravitation, where mass attracts mass. That means, while we're drawn to it, it doesn't like us back, and it runs away while we chase, because we just can't take a hint. But it's kind of the Marzod's fault, because it's sending mixed signals. When it runs away in reverse time, it's running toward us in regular time.


So what happens when we meet? Really good question, it could be a massive explosion, it could be nothing, we don't know because there are a lot of precedents in conflict and we can't exactly stick Marzod under a microscope to find out. One thing that could happen is it acts like a magnet, and when we meet, the polarization either cancels out or flips. If it cancels out, Marzod keeps running to the center of the Universe because of momentum, and if it flips, it still does that, but faster because it's pushing off us, attracted to us in reverse time, so running away. We do know there'd be no physical interaction, because extremely high energy has no mass and no substance, so either way, we pass right through and continue our journey, us to the edge, Marzod to the center. It's not clear whether life on Earth would survive the meeting, but let's not bring more questions into this Jenga tower of a theory.


So we eventually will hit the edge of the Universe, what happens then? If the Black Hole Cosmology Hypothesis is correct and our universe is just a black hole inside another universe, we'd hit the event horizon of the black hole, get bombarded with Hawking Radiation, quantum fluctuations, and the upshot is all the matter gets supercharged, way past the plasma level, and suddenly we're Marzod particles instead of normal matter. All that momentum we had is suddenly pushing us the opposite way, because we respond wrong to force. We make a sharp U-turn and head for the center of the Universe. But what happened to the Marzod from before, where did it go? Glad you asked.


Marzod kept right on its road trip, going faster and gaining energy as it did, because it does everything in reverse. Finally, it all hit the center, and all that energy gathered up in one ultra-dense spot just exploded. A lot of the energy was spent, and the Marzod wasn't Marzod anymore, it didn't have the high energy required, it was just normal matter. That's the Big Bang, if you haven't guessed it yet, and this theory offers an explanation for why it exploded, given that matter only ever attracts matter, and where all the Universe's energy came from, because it can't be created out of nowhere. Energy condenses into matter, but how the hell does matter become energy, or explode? Particles that have such high energy they have negative mass and do everything opposite, that's how.


So where did the original Big Bang come from? Easy, that's Black Hole Cosmology Hypothesis again. The hole yanked a lot of matter and energy in from its original Universe, and once it had enough energy to supercharge the mass in the center, it exploded. As for the actual seed of the black hole, well, if you figure out what causes that you be sure and let CERN know, they're kind of dying to find out. It's a bit of the fabric of the Universe that's going through its rebellious teenage years, is about all we've got on that.


Look, I won't pretend this theory is perfect or beyond contradiction, but it's built out of mainstream scientific theories. All the physicists can vouch for the building blocks, if not the house I built, so I think this is about as solid as it gets unless we can find some eyewitness testimony from the creation of the Universe. And since God has left humanity on read for the last handful of centuries, I think this is the best we can do.