Imagine you're a stick figure drawn on a piece of paper. You live in two dimensions. You can go up, down, and to both sides, but you can't come off the paper. Depth doesn't exist. You're fine without it, can't even imagine it. You live your little stick figure life with your stick figure friends, and life is just peachy.


Then, one day, someone outside the paper sticks a knife into it, and it skewers your stick figure neighbor, Bob, as he's telling you about the little stick flowers he's going to put in front of his house. While you're glad that conversation is over, you're somewhat horrified that Bob just got ripped to shreds right in front of you. Remember, you can't see anything but the two dimensions, you have no inkling of some three-dimensional knife-wielding god. You can see the effects though, and you start telling everyone about unseen forces that can just end everything, everywhere, and they don't even need a reason. Your stick figure friends and family are understanding and supportive at first, but gradually it's too much for them to handle. It means nothing to them that you're getting letters from other stick figures who've seen the same kind of unexplained phenomena, they just figure crazy loves company. They lock you away in a stick figure asylum because they're afraid you might be dangerous, you're probably the one who killed Bob after all, and you live the rest of your life there.


Just like those 2D people don't know about the 3D world, we can't imagine what the 4D, 5D, or 6D worlds look like, and interacting with them is somewhere between difficult and impossible. Marzod is a higher dimensional energy, which we know because we can't see it, even though Qi, Brahman, Mana, Prana, Kawsay, and more all tell us, independently of each other, that it's there. It's running a circuit of your body, hitting a network of key points, like an electrical circuit with a lot of light bulbs. The exact locations of those bulbs have some variance across systems, but the main thing is, all the molecules of your body stick out into the higher dimensions and interact with Marzod. Higher dimensions are trippy places, where time and space are intertwined. That's the basis of the interconnection of Marzod, that it WAS connected, and so always IS connected.


I'll go over that differently for you. Think of the timeline as a room. You've got the Roman Empire over in the corner, you've got the creation of the Universe over by the window, you've got Genghis Khan around here somewhere, maybe he's over by the coffee pot. Now, they can't interact with each other, they're limited, they have no choice but to take a predetermined path around the room. Not you, though, you God of Time, you. You can go anywhere you want, because time and space are the same thing, or close enough.


If time and space are the same thing, then it doesn't matter if space separates two things, just go to a time when they were together and there's still a connection. Here on this end table, you've got a bird. On the couch next to it, the bird lost a feather. Now, one of these limited little people picks up the feather and casts a spell on it. Somehow, they accessed energy that's just as free as you are, and when they cast that spell, it went for that feather in all its time of existence, including when it was attached to the bird. You're shocked beyond words. Reaching from the couch to the end table is nothing to you, but for one of them to do it should be impossible.


That's the higher dimensions for you. That's why there's so many common threads in myth and magic across cultures that had nothing to do with each other. They all used energy to affect Marzod, and from there touched the higher dimensions. Sympathetic magic, psychic imprints, telepathy, telekinesis, this was all stuff we could see at work, but we didn't really have a good line on how, so our results were spotty at best. We knew point A, we knew point B, but science hadn't evolved to a point yet where it could draw us a line between the two. Basic science spent millenia telling us all these things were lies, misunderstandings, and kind of dumb, and we bought it. Turns out, as in most things, you have to go beyond the basics.