We covered the matter last chapter, now let's talk souls. The Marzod flowing back sometimes gets snagged on higher-dimensional aspects of some types of matter, and that creates life. It's not heading back to the Bang, it's trapped in a circuit of a body, and this may not be the first time. The more times the loop repeats, the more of the Marzod flying back at the matter has been a soul at some point. Now, it wasn't always intelligent, it could have been a plant or an animal. In fact, there could be loops without intelligent life at all, or where there's no color red, or where it's all space jellyfish with laser eyes, because we've always had more matter flying in from our parent universe, causing little differences in the loop, little butterfly effects that didn't happen any of the previous times. This might be why some people are so good at being sentient, and some people really suck at it, the successful ones have been sentient more times, and their innate memories are giving just enough of a push to tell them what works and what doesn't.


Now, I hasten to add, if you want to try to spin that into your ignorant, bigoted worldview, you take that somewhere else, because there's no basis for that. All humans have the same hardware, the only notable difference is software, and if you're not on board with that, let me know and I'll send you a list of remedial biology classes in your area. And the hardware all being the same, why the hell would Marzod pick one race, gender, or caste over another? So, some people have more innate understanding of complex society than others, some have less, and it's random. Some Marzod snags on lifeforms that have high intelligence, some snags on a blade of grass instead. Don't brag to me because you think you won the lottery a bunch of times, because misunderstanding my point that badly will only prove to me that you didn't win it as many times as you think. My point isn't exclusion or establishing hierarchy, my point is harmony, just like it was five minutes ago, and every time before that.


While the dimmer bulbs take some time to absorb that, let's the rest of us talk about crabs. Did you know five different species have looked at their bodies and said "this sucks, wanna go be crabs?" It's true, all these species, independently of each other, evolved into crabs, because the crab isn't the most graceful, or the smartest, or the toughest, but it's the best, most resilient and capable body type for its environment, and all the other species are waiting on is the accidental mutation that turns them into crabs too. Evolution is a messy, chaotic process that weeds out inferior forms and converges toward the best, from all directions, because there's only one "best." In the ocean, that's the crab, and if you want to look into it more, it's called carcinization. Carcinisation if you prefer the British.


So, over the course of many universal loops, the number of souls who've been sentient grows, and they learn harmony is the best way. They may not recognize or remember it on a conscious level, but their innate memory helps prod them along. Even people who are evil and successful eventually end up there, because when did you ever meet someone who was a self-centered prick AND had a fulfilling personal life? They learn to do better. And it's this innate memory that sometimes leads to prophecy, because the soul sees how things are shaping up and recognizes familiar ground from past loops. Some are very similar to the current loop, others are so different they come through like a bad acid trip.


Eventually, everyone reaches perfection. There's only one "best," and we're all evolving that way, remember? Eventually there's a loop where everyone is doing the best possible thing in every situation, and everything is great. It's Heaven, to borrow from religion. Then our Universe ends.


Don't worry, everything keeps going. Our Universe ended because it's just a black hole inside another universe, and it finally hit the edge, got turned to Marzod, and is rocketing backward to THAT Big Bang. And now our perfection gets to influence that universe, cause it to evolve our way until it catches up to us. This keeps going, all the way up the chain, until we get back to the original universe, where Marzod Infanti first started evolving and experimenting, through its stages of Marzod Juvenilis, all the way to Marzod Cancrorum, the crab. It tried chaos, order, war, peace, created an infinite number of universes, and they all evolved to the crab. Perfection was inevitable, because imperfection is unstable.