Everything sticks into the higher dimensions to some extent, just like everything has width, height, depth, but certain points in your body interact with Marzod more than others. It's hard to say why, since we can't see these dimensions. It's not immediately clear why one part of the body attracts Marzod more than others, but the Indians call these points Chakras, the Chinese call them Meridians, and basically what we're talking about is a place where Marzod is drawn in its circuit of the body. By changing these points and the paths between them, you change the flow. You affect the higher dimensions by affecting the flow of Marzod.


A neat concept, you're thinking, but so what? I'll tell you so what, while there's some disagreement on where these points are, depending on which system you pick, they all agree your brain is a big one. That's why focus, intent, and force of will play such a large role here. You're changing the bloodflow and bioelectrical activity in your brain, which changes how that node interacts with Marzod. You're changing the flow of higher dimensional energy just by thinking about it hard enough.


Now, where do those other nodes come in? Your body works as a unit, and your brain is the command center. Those other nodes are pitching in, taking orders from the brain, reporting back what happens. The practice of magic and spirituality is a full-body event, and the more you've got your body in line, the more effective you'll be. Any number of belief systems involve something like Marzod, as we've already touched on, and most of them agree good mental, emotional, and physical health is the biggest key to making that force do what it should. All over Asia, whether India, China, Japan, Tibet, they take an approach of direct stimulation of the nodes, whether it's acupuncture or pressure therapy. The focus of those is usually internal, personal health and such, but it stands to reason that machines produce the best results when all their parts work.


Now the interesting question is, once we've got the nodes operating at peak efficiency, what can we do to amplify the effect? Putting low voltage, heat, or vibration into a node is introducing more energy, giving Marzod something different. There's not a lot of info on this, so we're blazing a brand new trail there. People looking for external effects pretty much just use their brain nodes, the effect of the others is unexplored from that perspective. But there's nothing stopping you from trying. It'll take some work, figuring out where another node is, there's not such wide agreement on the location of others, but once you've found one, go nuts. Stimulate it any way you can think of and see what happens.


Meantime, for those of us who are less adventurous, it's all about focus. That, and making sure our bodies are a decent circuit for the energy. Exercise, don't eat garbage, and try to stay relaxed and positive. The better your internal mechanism is ticking, the more you can do with Marzod. I never saw a circuit yet that didn't see a power loss if the wires were screwed up. Your brain is the main thing, but it's not the only thing. If your wiring is bad, it doesn't really matter if your breaker box is in prime shape, the lights still won't come on.