Let me first say, if you haven't read Of Ghosts and Gods in the Book of Water, you're going to have a hard time understanding this chapter. Nutshell version, spirits are higher dimensional energy, and they collect third dimensional energy to do stuff in our dimension. If you've got a spirit causing you trouble, the best thing to do about it is take away his energy, but before we get started, simmer down a little, because most unfriendly spirits are just frustrated. We've talked about how it's hard for them to communicate, they've been trying and you're not picking up what they're laying down. You moved into their house, you're all in their space, and you don't take notice when they ask you to back off, course they're a little cranky. Before you go on the warpath, communicate with them. Hire a pro if you need to. I'm sure you can work something out.


The flip side of that is, some people are just dicks. They were born dicks, they were dicks all through their lives, and they're dicks in death, and the only thing that'll make them behave is a swift boot to the ass. That's where this chapter gives you some help. Cultures through history, all over the world, have seen spirits driven off by all these things, and now that we understand Marzod and energy, we have a good idea why.


First, Iron. Iron is a ground, if you connect it to the Earth. Any energy that comes near gets sucked in, that's exactly how a lightning rod works. While a wire might just irritate a ghost, taking little sips of his energy supply, a big iron I-beam sunk in the ground is an energy vacuum. Silver is even better, it's got near 100% conductivity, but once it tarnishes that drops a lot.


Bodies of water are bad news for spirits too. You can't carry a lake in your pocket, or at least I never met anyone who did, but it's good to keep in mind that water is a conductor, and if it's touching the dirt it's a natural ground, which will suck the energy out of any ghost that comes near. If a ghost is chasing you and you're unarmed, I'd head for the nearest natural water and jump in. It'd be a hell of a powerful ghost who can keep chasing.


Crystals and mirrors have been shown across cultures and continents to repel ghosts, and my best guess is because of light refraction. Since spirits can only interact through energy, they see energy different from us. He'll see every beam of light, and all of a sudden you've sent beams all over the room. At the very least, it'd be confusing and overwhelming to navigate a room full of scattered light if that was the main thing you could see. Hard to zero in on a human's energy if the room is full of it. Salt does it better than anything else, each grain is a crystal, covered in irregular, reflective surfaces. You spill a salt shaker, the room's just full of interference.


Remember the part about how Marzod is a quantum field? High levels of energy will disrupt those. Ghosts feed on energy, but there's such a thing as too much of a good thing. Cultures all over the world have seen lots of energy, like a cannon or the sun or a blazing fire, drive spirits off. This will depend heavily on the spirit's strength and the strength of what noise, light, or heat you produce. This is not a good first choice, it can backfire in all the obvious ways, like fighting a pit bull with a bucket of fried chicken. Still, if you're in a bind, give it a shot. Worst that can happen is the ghost kills you quicker than it already was.


Last, air pollution, usually smoke in ancient times, makes it hard for ambient energy to focus, which really messes with a ghost's ability to do anything, plus string theory tells us all those particles are really filling up the higher dimensions. You can't hurt it with smoke, but you might keep it from hurting you. Word of warning, though, smoke is only an annoyance most of the time. Incense, using small amounts of thin smoke, is used all over Asia for spirit work, and gods all over the world ate sacrifices on altars billowing smoke every which way. It might chase off a weak ghost, or one who's not real motivated to stay, but it's not a weapon for a ghost hunter.