In religious circles, there's always a lot of talk about sins in the plural. Well, I'm here to set you straight. There's only one sin, and the rest are more what you'd call guidelines. The Sin, singular, is the disruption of harmony, the state of peace and productivity within yourself, your community, and with God. Now, the catch is, it takes many forms, but this Sin is the only thing God cares about stopping.


First form of the Sin, singular, is harm of others. It's shown in any number of commandments, and I won't list them because you already know it, God doesn't want people hurting each other. The only exception here is when the person themselves is a bigger threat to harmony than hurting them would be. If they've hurt someone, if they're disrespectful of God, if they themselves are committing the Sin in a major way, then you’re generally allowed to do whatever it takes to stop them, showing God never cared about this form of the Sin in particular, he cares about the bottom line, stopping the Sin in general. Now, that's not a free pass to do harm whenever you think you've got an excuse. All harm is disruptive, it's just that sometimes one disruption is preferable to another, if one has to happen. For it to be a just response, harm to the person must be less disruptive than what they're doing, and it has to be the only way to stop them.


Second form of the Sin is harm to self. When you get sick or injured, other members of the community have to work harder, picking up your slack. This was the basis of all those laws of diet and hygiene God imposed on the Jewish and Islamic people, that you're to stay healthy and fully functional so you can provide the most benefit to your community. There's also a major subclause to this one, on counterproductive attitude. If you're arrogant or hostile or generally a prick, you're hard to work with, you disrupt harmony, and God hates when people commit the Sin.


Third form of the Sin is disruption of community standards. Now, every community rule isn't sacred, you're not going to Hell for littering, smoking, or wearing white after Labor Day, I'm talking about the real stuff, the rules that go toward peace, dignity, and cohesion. If it's just a matter of the HOA trying to mind your business or Westboro Baptist caring way too much about what strangers are doing and who they're doing it with, you can tell them to kick rocks. Moses wasn't concerned about the disruption he caused by taking the Israelites out of Egypt. Jesus didn't worry who he'd bother when he flipped the moneylenders’ tables in the Tabernacle. You know why? Because following the rules and allowing those situations to continue violated the Sin more than stopping it.


The Sin, and every commandment, generally boils down to those three things. Long as you're not committing the Sin, or as long as your committing it is less disruptive than it would be if you didn't step up, all the other commandments are fungible.


Don't believe me? Look in Joshua 2:5-6, where Rahab lies to soldiers to protect Israelite spies in Jericho. Isn't lying a sin? But you just try and find me one word against Rahab in the whole Bible. Leviticus 24:9 says there's a certain bread in the Temple reserved for the priests, but David ate it in 1 Samuel 21:6, and in Matthew 12:3-5, Jesus says that and the desecration of the Sabbath don't matter, because of context. Whatever your thoughts on Biblical law, I'm pretty sure Jesus's opinion trumps yours. Rahab and David sinned, but they didn't commit the Sin, so they were in the clear, they upheld the spirit if not the letter.


Numbers 21:8-9 states that Moses was ordered by God to make a bronze serpent to cure the Israelites of snakebite, which I'd say they pretty well deserved, since they were dumb enough to speak against God knowing full well how that was going to turn out, but God was willing to give them another chance to behave themselves. Flip forward now to 2 Kings 18:4, King Hezekiah smashes it up because it had become an idol, showing the tool itself wasn't good or bad, only how it was used, its involvement in the third form of the Sin was unacceptable. See it again in Matthew 19:24, it's easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter Heaven, but Solomon had gold like Scrooge McDuck and until his wives led him into the Sin, God had nothing bad to say about him. It's the pride, the arrogance, the second form of the Sin to be avoided, not anything on the outside. Jesus says it twice in the book of Matthew, straight up, in both 6:5 and 23:28, that it doesn't matter how outwardly pious someone is, it's only what's in their heart that matters, if they're committing the Sin it doesn't matter what else they're doing, they're sunk. Don't you think the inverse is true too? Jesus did, when he talked about David eating that bread.


Want to see more? Genesis 11:1-9, God stopped the Tower of Babel in its tracks, but he sure didn't mind architecture in Exodus 31:1-6, when he gave several people the skills necessary to build a temple, showing he didn't punish the people of Babel for their actions, only their committing the Sin by building a monument to themselves. He hates pride, as seen for a long stretch of verses in Isaiah 47, and in 1 Corinthians 8:1-2. But he doesn't mind knowledge or ability or even divination, which is spoken against in several passages along with other witchcraft, and in fact God encourages those things in people who aren't otherwise sinful, as seen in Daniel 1:17-20, or Solomon's massive amount of knowledge seen in 1 Kings 4:33. God loves when good people advance, he only stops the progress of people committing the Sin.


Oh, you wanted Islamic references? Well, should have said so earlier, I've got those. Check Sahih al-Bukhari Hadith 1, or Sahih Muslim number 1907, where the Prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him, says actions are judged by intentions, not on their own merits. Check Surah al-Baqarah 2:173, Allah doesn't really, truly mind if you break some minor laws, you just probably shouldn't be eating roadkill if you can avoid it. As long as you aren't committing the Sin, you're probably in the clear. The purpose of the laws in Islam and Judaism, the ones that don't deal in harm to others or personal attitude, are to keep everyone healthy, happy, working well together, and bolstering each other's faith through outward expression. But you see now, the law isn't an absolute, as long as you don't get in the way of the true intention of it, your deity really doesn't care about you breaking it.


Now, I know Matthew 5:17-19 says Jesus came not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it. I'm also aware of James 2:10, where anyone who stumbles at one part of the law breaks all of it. Look, I don't know how to tell you this, but you're going to have to read the whole page to know what they're talking about, trimming one sentence out of a speech doesn't impress me. If you can read a whole page of “be a good person” and your takeaway is that one bit where they said “follow the law,” and you think they're talking about Temple etiquette, you're beyond my help. What mental backflips do you have to turn to think James wants to put the Pharisee badge on for one verse, then take it off and continue his speech on being decent to people? That line is calling out people who obey the law but are still pricks, not saying you'll go to Hell for eating the wrong sandwich.


To anyone else who thinks the letter of the law is still important after you've seen how willing God is to make exceptions, Jesus has a special message for you, and he was so worried you'd miss it, he said it about thirty different ways, in Matthew 23:23-24, Mark 2:27, Matthew 12:1-8, Matthew 15:3-9, Luke 11:46, and Matthew 9:13. If you can read all that and still think your job is to police the technicalities, then you’re not following Christ, you're auditioning for the Pharisees. For the Jewish folks, check Hosea 6:6, Micah 6:8, Isaiah 1:11-17, Amos 5:21-24, Proverbs 21:3, Psalm 51:16-17, and Muslims, Qur’an 2:177, Qur’an 49:13, Qur’an 5:8, Qur’an 22:37, Sahih Bukhari 1, Sahih Muslim 2564. God doesn't care what you're doing, he cares about the effect on your community, and even then he only cares whether you meant it or not. Some things fall under a general prohibition because it'd be hard to do them without committing the Sin, generally in arrogance or harm to others, but if you can find a way to do them while keeping away from the Sin, he doesn't mind making an exception. You don't even need to ask permission or forgiveness, if you know you're not committing the Sin, God doesn't care about the technicalities. Can't promise the same of his followers, though.