If God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and hands-on, then what the hell is an Angel? Why would he create them? Why keep them around? What are they doing that he wasn't already fully capable of doing himself? Did he create lower beings for giggles? Course he didn't, God doesn't go off and do things just because he can. The answer is, Angels and God aren't separate beings, not really.


If you've read the Bible, you know at least in the earliest stories, Angels pop up and start relaying a message from God, except they're saying all that in the first person. The text will get a little confused too, whether an Angel is speaking or God is. There's no failure of translation here, even in the original text, there's a very fuzzy line between Angels and God, and scholars have been tossing this question around pretty much since the Bible was written. It's not even that strange, if you're any Christian at all, you know the Nicene Creed. God, Jesus, and the Holy Spirit are fully three separate individuals, but also fully one. Okay, I lied, that is strange as all hell, but it's a strangeness you've already accepted, so I'm at least not bringing in any new strangeness. If you can understand that three individuals are those three individuals, but also one, you can understand a bigger number than three, even if accepting it would make Emperor Constantine call you a heretic.


Want to see for yourself? Genesis 16:7-13, Genesis 22:12, Exodus 3, Judges 2:1-3, Judges 6:12-18, go ahead and read those, then try to tell me an Angel is a fully separate entity from God. God is the brain, Angels are the hands. In Islam, it's seen just that way, Angels are fully incapable of having their own opinions, they're just walking, talking Allah telephones. It seems pretty clear that the author of the Bible meant to convey the same idea here, they just didn't spell it out, because the nature of Angels really wasn't what they were trying to talk about here, that's not important from our perspective. But that Islamic view of Angels as just fancy robots isn't in the Quran. It's hinted at, and that's the dominant traditional view, but Scripturally, it's not put in terms that would allow no wiggle room, and there are plenty of Muslims who disagree.


Let's put a pin in that for a second and talk about Buddhism. In the Mahayana school of thought, although the earlier Theravada school would disagree, it's seen that everything is one, just imagines itself separate, and the path to eternal happiness is to stop imagining that and rejoin the whole. Clearly this is the view of Angels, who, if they have free will, make the choice to stop being an individual and see themselves as one with God. The Hindu concept of Brahman and Atman is similar to the Buddhist beliefs. There, all things are one, Brahman, but they believe themselves separate, and they're so wrapped up in their individuality, Atman, that they straight up forget what they truly are. Hinduism doesn't emphasize rejoining the whole, they'd rather celebrate the individuality while acknowledging the underlying connection, but in basis, it's the same.


And it's the same thing with God. The Trinity is one, the Angels are also part of the whole, but Jesus prayed to God any number of times in his life, and Satan, an angel, tempted Jesus to sin. These are clearly not just one guy running around wearing different masks, they are very much different entities, but we've also seen they're not, not really. Bet you didn't think you'd find out today that Christianity and Hinduism share a major core similarity, did you? The Nicene Creed is just a very limited form of Brahman, in function if not in tradition, and that “same but separate” unity isn't limited to the Trinity, based on those Bible verses where Angels speak as God. If this has you reconsidering the Nicene Creed now, check out John 8:58, John 10:30, John 14:9, John 17:21, it'd be a little bit of a stretch to try arguing Jesus is a separate entity from God, given how many times he said it.


If you want to push it farther, my own personal theory is that Yahweh is the name of the band, not the lead singer. All spirits are interconnected, if they believe they're one, then they are, and I think that's exactly what happened when the Angels came together to form God. These guys don't even have names, they have jobs. If you've ever noticed all the Angel names end in -el or -iel, that's a clue, that suffix means “of God,” preceded by a noun, so these names are just job titles. Gabriel is "strength of God," Raphael is “mercy of God," Uriel means "urine of God." Okay, I made that one up, but you get the point. When you call on Gabriel, you're not calling a guy, you're ringing up the Strength Department, please hold for the next available Angel.


Does that theory change anything? Not really. God is God, whether he's an individual decision or a collective vote, it's all the same on our end. All I'm saying is the pieces fit. And personally, I find it a lot easier to believe this self-erasing group of deities acts as an individual than that they all decided to follow some guy who has an incredibly strong sense of Self and 613 strong opinions on your lunch order and your fashion sense.