Cultures all over the world have had their Pantheons of gods, and outside of the Middle East, it was never the God of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Why is that? Why would God only reveal his laws to such a small group of people, presumably leaving the rest to spend eternity in Hell through no fault of their own? That's not very loving or just. Well, the answer is, there's a difference between God and the power of God. Let's talk about Marzod.


Logos to the Greeks, Brahman to the Hindi, Aether to most Western occultists, and Marzod in my writings, is the impersonal, primordial force that permeates everything. All the systems don't agree on the details, but there's a common thread running through them. It's the origin of the Universe, the energy everything else, every bit of matter or energy in the Universe, developed from. Marzod is the force harnessed by God to do what he does, and this force is all about harmony and balance, because when one being harms another, that's just Marzod hurting itself. Remember when we talked about the Sin, singular? It's the most important thing to God, the most important thing to the Hindi, it was the most important thing in nearly every religion everywhere, all through time.


See, ancient man was easy. Marzod, not as an intelligence, but as a reactive system that exists outside of time, sees trouble coming from way upstream, so by the time humans start raising a fuss, a sky god shows up, a spirit that's been building his power for centuries, and he gets people's attention with a big damn storm. Then once they're listening, that sky god lays down a list of rules to stay on his good side, and wouldn't you know, all those rules have to do with keeping harmony and unity. Give that sky god about ten friends who also like harmony and unity, suddenly everyone around is living by Marzodian principles, and everything is peachy. Wouldn't work today, unfortunately. We're so convinced the supernatural is impossible, we could see a god with our own eyes doing impossible things, and we'd cry mass hallucination, special effects, flouride in the water, we'd stick our fingers in our ears, close our eyes, and hum real loud till the gods go away. And even if we were finally convinced, good luck convincing anyone who wasn't there.


That's why Marzod stopped popping out gods left and right, it'd be completely ineffective. Sure, maybe you can convince a few people who can see, touch, hear, smell, and taste the whole thing, live and in person, but then you have to do that billions more times, and then repeat it in the next generation. Not that Marzod plans things out like that, it's just a reactive system, but so is evolution, and you'll see that when a new threat crops up, everything in that area goes through real, physical changes to deal with it. It can take hundreds or thousands of years, but that's where Marzod has a leg up: As a higher dimensional energy, time and space really aren't an issue, so the solution can crop up at exactly the same time as the problem, or even before it. Marzod wants balance, and it'll react to an imbalance. And it didn't stop, it only evolved. About 500 years ago the dominant, widest-traveling cultures of the world stopped being run by superstition quite so much, science started to slowly edge into the driver's seat, so instead of gods, Marzod had to form regular people who felt driven to a cause, who could fit in and affect the powers we respect most, our social institutions, our government, our money.


So what does this mean for God? Well, God is one of those spirits that got power through Marzod. So does that mean he was lying, all those times in the Bible and Quran where he talked about being the beginning and end of everything? Absolutely not. Identifying himself as Marzod is a perfectly valid perspective, it's just not the ONLY perspective. Let's talk about spiritual links.


When we talk about a spiritual link, we’re saying two things have become one, so when a being linked to Marzod says he's the Alpha and Omega, it's quibbling over details to debate whether he means Marzod or his own unique personality that's linked to Marzod, it's like arguing which cells in your body are the oldest. That linked personality IS Marzod, as is every other linked personality, and they're all each other, too, in the same way your hand is still you. It's all one, and it'd just be stupid for the body to say the hand isn't a part of it. If you want Saint Paul's opinion on that, check 1 Corinthians 12:15-26. I hope I'm not spoiling it for you when I tell you he agrees with me.


Course, that's not to say these deities were always the same. “Harmony” is a little bit of a nebulous concept to give ancient man as a law, the gods had to come up with laws to demonstrate what harmony might look like, and they all had slightly different ways of laying it down. They still had their own personalities, their own tendencies, and sometimes they'd get derailed. They'd stop being so much about order, start being more about conquest, or human sacrifice, or extreme punishments as some self-aggrandizing show of dominance. On that last one, I'm not naming any names, but I bet you Christian, Jewish, and Islamic readers know someone who did that at least a few times. But that's to be expected, it doesn't mean that any of these deities weren't generally good, wise, and just. They just weren't always, and some were less Marzodian than others.


This is exactly how the Hindi see deities. Brahman pops them out as needed, because something is out of balance and has to be set right. Some are very kind and wise, some are the complete opposite, but the personality was picked by Brahman because that personality paired with power was going to resolve some issue. For a recent example on a related note, look to Manchester, England in the mid 1800s, when the industrial revolution was in full swing. Air pollution from factories darkened the bark of all the trees around, and all the light brown moths lost their camouflage, they didn't blend anymore, so they evolved to turn dark gray, making the Peppered Moth. It's not an intelligence or personality making a decision, it's a reactive, interconnected system whose goal is balance.


So how about mythology? Do I believe Zeus came and tossed lightning bolts around every time he felt cranky, or that Joshua knocked down the walls of Jericho by blowing a horn? Do I believe Winter happens because Baldr kicked the bucket or Persephone went to the Underworld? Not really. Some of those things may have a historical root, and sure, genuine magic, gods, and miracles happen, but interaction with spirits and deities is a lot less concrete than these stories would have it, and there's never any telling where embellishments were added to improve the story. If you find knowledge and understanding in the Old Testament, or the teachings of the Buddha, or Aztec myths, I think that's great, I really do, but I doubt archaeologists or historians will back you up on it, and it was all written through the lens of the author's time, place, cultural attitudes, and life experience, which in ancient times generally was limited to events within the 30-mile radius of where he was born. None of it is absolute and incontrovertible, but nothing ever is, and that doesn't make it worthless.


In the end, this idea doesn't weaken the God of Abraham. He's still the Universe's original force of creation, omniscient, omnipotent, he's still everything he ever was, because he's one with that force and indistinguishable from it. If anything, this idea strengthens him. All he cares about is order and balance, and lots of gods have been the same, in countless cultures around the world. And because they were all linked to Marzod, they were all different limbs on the same tree, different from each other, but working to the same goal. This idea reconciles the idea of an omnipotent creator with the God who, until a couple thousand years ago, limited his sphere of influence to a few tribes in the Middle Eastern desert. He's still Marzod, and he's not lying when he says he is, and from a certain perspective, his influence was worldwide since the beginning of human history, because harmony, balance, and order were the only real concerns of this God, and any other god of Marzod.